Blog: Understanding the auth code grant (#3241)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/understanding-the-authorization-code-grant.mdx

---
publish_date: 2024-09-10
title: Understanding The Authorization Code Grant

> description: We'll dive into the benefits of Authorization Code Grant in simplifying your app's authentication flows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: You'll dive into the benefits of Authorization Code Grant in simplifying your app's authentication flows.
```

authors: Alex Patterson
categories: Education
image: /img/blogs/video-auth-code-grant/authorization-code-grant-simple.png
tags: oauth, code grant
excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---
import Aside from '../../components/Aside.astro';
import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

> In this video, we will guide you through the intricacies of the [Authorization Code Grant flow](/articles/login-authentication-workflows/webapp/oauth-authorization-code-grant-sessions-refresh-tokens-cookies) using FusionAuth's sandbox environment. This simple example aims to be accessible to everyone, so follow along as we dive into the details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this video, you will be guided through the intricacies of the [Authorization Code Grant flow](/articles/login-authentication-workflows/webapp/oauth-authorization-code-grant-sessions-refresh-tokens-cookies) using FusionAuth's sandbox environment. This simple example aims to be accessible to everyone, so follow along and let's dive into the details.
```

{/* more */}

<YouTube id="mmyfwovnago" />

## What Is The Authorization Code Grant?

The Authorization Code Grant is a widely used method in OAuth 2.0 for enabling users to securely authenticate with third-party applications. For the tech nerds in the house that is [RFC6749](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749). This method involves redirecting the user to an authorization server, obtaining an authorization code, and then exchanging that code for an access token. 
Let's break this process down step-by-step.

### Starting Point: The Initial URL

> Our journey begins by navigating to the admin application for FusionAuth. Initially, the URL [https://sandbox.fusionauth.io/admin](https://sandbox.fusionauth.io/admin) points to FusionAuth's admin UI, which then delegates authentication to FusionAuth itself. This delegation redirects us to the hosted login page that is both themed and customizable.

Reviewer: Do you want to point to other methods to use FusionAuth? Docker, etc.

Author: this is part of the demo in the video, don't want to confuse much here for the post.

<Aside type="note">
FusionAuth allows deep [customization](/docs/customize/look-and-feel/), so the look and feel can differ based on the client's branding.
</Aside>

### Customized Login Page

> In the below example, we'll use a customized login page from one of our clients as an example. You will notice familiar elements such as email and password fields, but there's a distinct branding as intended by Private Division. Once logged in, we proceed through the authentication flow and get redirected to the Admin UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the below example, you'll use a customized login page from one of our clients as an example. You will notice familiar elements such as email and password fields, but there's a distinct branding as intended by Private Division. Once logged in, we proceed through the authentication flow and get redirected to the Admin UI.
```

Reviewer: Should check over for all replacement of **we** vs **you**.

1. **Security**:
    
    
    - By redirecting users to FusionAuth's hosted login pages, we make sure that applications delegating authentication to FusionAuth don't need to handle sensitive information like credentials.
    - This minimizes the risk of sensitive data being spread across multiple applications.
    
    <Aside type="note">
    The application simply sends the user to FusionAuth. FusionAuth performs the checks and then returns the necessary information to the application.
    </Aside>
2. **Features**:
    
    
    - Delegating authentication to FusionAuth enables us to offer new features without burdening your application.
    - Features like [profile](/docs/lifecycle/manage-users/account-management/updating-user-data) management, [Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/multi-factor-authentication), [session management](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/logout-session-management), etc., can be added through FusionAuth or its APIs with minimal complexity.
    
    <Aside type="note">
    New features can be added via FusionAuth or its APIs, keeping the application blissfully unaware of the complexities involved.

>     </Aside>

Reviewer: Could point here for further detail: https://fusionauth.io/docs/get-started/core-concepts/hosted-login-vs-api-login

Author: Since we aren't doing the hosted in this video / sdk's I think it would be better to leave that one out.

## Implementing the Authorization Code Grant with FusionAuth

To implement this, we'll follow easily configured steps, making sure the application is well-integrated with FusionAuth.

### Step 1: Setting Up the Authorization Request

Start by building the [authorization code grant request](https://fusionauth.io/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/endpoints#authorization-code-grant-request). This URL will redirect the user to FusionAuth's login page.

```http
GET /oauth2/authorize?client_id={client_id}&redirect_uri={redirect_uri}&response_type=code&tenantId={tenantId}&scope={scope}
```

**Replace the placeholders**:

- `client_id`: Your Application's Client Id.
- `redirect_uri`: The URI where the user will be redirected after logging in.
- `scope`: The permissions your application needs, like `openid` and `offline_access`.
- `response_type`: Always `code` in this case.
- `tenantId`: The unique Tenant Id used for applying the proper theme.

<Aside type="tip">
Make sure to URL encode the query parameters.
</Aside>

### Step 2: Handling the Redirect

> When the user logs in successfully, FusionAuth will redirect them back to your `redirect_uri` with an [authorization code and state](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/endpoints#response). Your application needs to extract these parameters.

Reviewer: Just a suggestion: 
```suggestion
When the user logs in successfully, FusionAuth will redirect them back to your `redirect_uri` with an [authorization code and state](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/endpoints#response). Your application needs to handle the callback and extract these parameters.
```
This example seems a little weird to me. The application needs to be able to handle this, but it almost seems like your application needs to make this call which is not the case.

```http
GET /callback?code=AUTHORIZATION_CODE&state=YOUR_STATE
```

### Step 3: Exchanging the Authorization Code for an Access Token

Next, your application sends a POST request to FusionAuth's token endpoint to exchange the authorization code for an access token.

```http
POST /oauth2/token HTTP/1.1
Host: sandbox.fusionauth.io
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
Accept: */*
Content-Length: 436
client_id=3c219e58-ed0e-4b18-ad48-f4f92793ae32&code=+WYT3XemV4f81ghHi4V+RyNwvATDaD4FIj0BpfFC4Wzg&grant_type=authorization_code&redirect_uri=https%3A%2F%2F.sandbox.fusionauth.io
```

### Step 4: Using the Access Token

Once you receive the access token, you can use it to authenticate API requests.

```http
GET /your-api-endpoint
Authorization: Bearer ACCESS_TOKEN
```

> One of the most common ways to verify the access token is by requesting the [JSON Web Key Set (JWKS)](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/endpoints#json-web-key-set-jwks) public keys generated by FusionAuth. This will allow your system to cryptographically verify JWTs using the JWKS format.

Reviewer: may need to link to discusion of JWTs and verification.

Author: You think on top of what is shown in the video and linked here, what link are you thinking to add? 

Like the API?
https://fusionauth.io/docs/apis/jwt

Or this
https://fusionauth.io/articles/tokens/building-a-secure-jwt

> One of the most common ways to verify the access token is by requesting the [JSON Web Key Set (JWKS)](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/endpoints#json-web-key-set-jwks) public keys generated by FusionAuth. This will allow your system to cryptographically verify JWTs using the JWKS format.

Author: ```suggestion
One of the most common ways to verify the access token is by requesting the [JSON Web Key Set (JWKS)](/docs/lifecycle/authenticate-users/oauth/endpoints#json-web-key-set-jwks) public keys generated by FusionAuth. This will allow your system to cryptographically verify JWTs using the JWKS format. To find out more information you can read through our [JWT API docs](https://fusionauth.io/docs/apis/jwt).
```
